Export FlashcardsQuestionAnswerHint
      What are the 4 components of a case definition? 1)Clinical information on 
      the disease 2)Characteristics of the people affected 3)Information about 
      location or place 4)Time during whihc an outbreak occured Use an acronym! 
      Think CCIT
      What are the 5 components of Public Health Surveillance? 1)Ongoing 
      collection of data 2)Interpretation of data 3)Analysis 4)Dissemination of 
      data (spread the word) 5)Action linked to the health/risk factor Think 
      acronyms again! OIADA
      What are the 2 triads of analysis person/place/time agent/host/environment 
      PPT and AHE triads are triangles, draw it out if you're a visual learner.
      What are the 5 most common causes of the common cold? 1)rhinovirus 
      2)coronavirus 3)adenovirus 4)influenza C virus 5)coxsackievirus make up a 
      story: The rhino with the cold had swollen adenoids (tonsil like 
      structures in the throat) and drank a corona beer then he got the flu and 
      a C on his report card and got the sack at his job.
      Define a cohort study and list some pros/cons Compares 2 groups; One group 
      is exposed to another group that is unexposed or has a different level of 
      exposure. it is followed over time to determine differences in outcome. 
      pros: reduces some forms of bias and controls confounders cons: cannot 
      distinguish causality from correlation, expernsive, lengthy, and possible 
      bias due to multiple measures. Think bias and expense
      Define a cross sectional study and list some pros/cons A cross sectional 
      study is used to assess acute or chronic conditions in a population. It 
      determines prevalence. A disease and exposure status are examined at the 
      same time. pros: quick, cheap, allows collecting of multiple covarients 
      cons: cannot assess causality, confounding, and bias Think disease and 
      exposure status
      Define a case-control study and list some pros/cons The study is usually 
      conducted by small research teams and involves identifying the outcome 
      first and then choosing different risk factors to explore. Groups of cases 
      are chosen by using medical records or interviews. Controls are then 
      selected. pros: cheap cons: no indication of absolute risk, confounding 
      Think cost and risk factors
      What insect vectors malaria to people? Anopheles mosquito it's a 
      bloodsucker
      How was the bubonic plague spread? rodents to fleas to people Think 
      transmission pathway
      How is Yellow Fever/Dengue Fever spread? from a human, bird, or monkey 
      resovoir to a mosquito to people think resovoirs. Fun Fact: This was a 
      major problem during the construction of the Panama Canal
      How is Lyme Disease spread? mice to ixodes tick to people Many hunters and 
      campers catch this disease if they don't wear insect repellant and long 
      pants.
      How is African Sleeping Sickness spread? resovoir in animals or people to 
      tse tse fly to people Causes the deaths of many people in Africa each 
      year, and is getting worse with global warming since it aids the breeding 
      of the carrier insect.
      What is a zoonotic disease? A disease that is vectored to people from 
      animals. What do you find in a zoo?
      What does CDC and WHO stand for? Centers for Disease Control and 
      Prevention World Health Organization (under the United Nations control) 
      there's a hidden letter in the CDC title (P stands for...)
      What is a pandemic? it is a world-wide or continent wide epidemic of a 
      disease Think of the world in a frying pan...
